growth as the job is to connect users to
the value of your product. Growth
sometimes gets this reputation that it's
just pure metrics hacking. You've worked
at three of the most successful consumer
subscription products in the world. What
do you think is the biggest missing
piece that people don't get about
building a successful consumer
subscription product?
>> User retention is gold for consumer
subscription companies. If you don't
retain your users, then a lot of the
onus is on getting them to pay on day
one. Gnome Leavinski, he said that I
need to ask you about the biggest
monetization win that you found at
Grammarly. The lived product experience
for most of the free users was that
Grammarly was just a product to fix your
spelling and grammar because those were
the free suggestions. What if we
actually sampled a number of different
paid suggestions and interspersed them
to free users across their writing? All
of a sudden, people were seeing
Grammarly as a much more powerful tool
than they were before. What's the most
counterintuitive lesson you've learned
about building teams? I saw some of the
highest performers just being people
that had very high agency, had that
clock speed, had that energy, but they
didn't necessarily need to have deep
experience on that matter. Sometimes
experience could be a crutch, especially
in this world where the grounds are
shifting so fast with AI. A lot of your
learned habits actually need to be
intentionally discarded.
Today, my guest is Albert Chen. Albert
is known as one of the top consumer
growth minds in the world. He led growth
and monetization at three of the most
successful and beloved consumer products
in the world. Dualingo, Grammarly, and
now chess.com. Earlier in his career at
YouTube, he worked on streaming and
gaming features used by over 20 million
people. His unique approach to growth
blends marketing, data, strategy, and
product management. And in our
conversation, we cover a lot of ground,
including his explore and exploit
framework to find growth opportunities,
his biggest and most interesting growth
wins at Dualingo Grammarly.com,
how he uses AI to accelerate his growth
work, what he's come to realize about
the power of brand and community in your
growth work, his top experimentation
best practices, why his goal at every
company is to run 1,000 experiments a
year, and so much more. A huge thank you
to Eric Alabest, Nom Leavinsky, and
Jorge Mazal for suggesting topics for
this conversation. If you enjoy this
podcast, don't forget to subscribe and
follow it in your favorite podcasting
app or YouTube. It helps tremendously.
Also, if you become an annual subscriber
of my newsletter, you get 15 incredible
products for free for an entire year,
including Lovable, Replet, Bolt, Nadan,
Linear, Superhum, Dcript, Whisper Flow,
Gamma, Perplexity, Warp, Granola, Magic
Patterns, Raycast, JPRD, and Mobin. Head
on over to lennisnewsletter.com and
click product pass. With that, I bring
you Albert Chain. My podcast guests and
I love talking about craft and taste and
agency and product market fit. You know
what we don't love talking about? Sock
2. That's where Vanta comes in. Vanta
helps companies of all sizes get
compliant fast and stay that way with
industryleading AI automation and
continuous monitoring. Whether you're a
startup tackling your first SOCK 2 or
ISO 2701 or an enterprise managing
vendor risk, Vanta's trust management
platform makes it quicker, easier, and
more scalable. Vanta also helps you
complete security questionnaires up to
five times faster so that you can win
bigger deals sooner. The result,
according to a recent IDC study, Vanta
customers slashed over $500,000
a year and are three times more
productive. Establishing trust isn't
optional. Vanta makes it automatic. Get
$1,000 off at vanta.com/lenny.
This episode is brought to you by Jira
Product Discovery. The hardest part of
building products isn't actually
building products. It's everything else.
It's proving that the work matters,
managing stakeholders, trying to plan
ahead. Most teams spend more time
reacting than learning, chasing updates,
justifying road maps, and constantly
unblocking work to keep things moving.
Jira product discovery puts you back in
control. With Jira product discovery,
you can capture insights and prioritize
high impact ideas. It's flexible, so it
adapts to the way your team works and
helps you build a road map that drives
alignment, not questions. And because
it's built on Jira, you can track ideas
from strategy to delivery, all in one
place. Less chasing, more time to think,
learn, and build the right thing. Get
Jira product discovery for free at
atlassian.com/lenny.
That's atlassian.com/lenny.
Albert, thank you so much for being here
and welcome to the podcast.
>> Thanks for having me, Lenny. Excited to
be here.
>> I'm even more excited to have you here.
So, as I do for every podcast
conversation, I reached out to a bunch
of people that you've worked with that
know you well to find out what to ask
you about and what topics to spend time
on. Uh Jorge Mazal, who uh is famous in
my world for writing what was for the
longest time the most popular newsletter
post on my newsletter. It's actually
people have usurped it now, but it was
like stuck there for a long time. So
here here's what he wrote. It is a
mystery to me how Albert is able to do
what he does. I am actually eager to
listen to this episode and learn from
him.
>> That is super nice. Thank you, Jorge.
I've learned so much from him. I'm the
type of weird person that likes to wake
up before their kids and like pull up a
bunch of browser tabs and look at
experiments. So it was perfect that
Jorge brought me into the growth world
at Dualingo. learned a ton of uh best
practices and he's just a great guy.
Thanks, Oy.
>> We're already getting into these
tactics. I love it. Uh let me just give
a little framing on what I want to do
with this conversation. What I want to
try to do is to help people learn tools
and mental models for finding growth
opportunities for their own products and
essentially learn the growth mentality
that you bring into the companies and
products that you work on. What I want
to start with is to give us a little
insight into how you became what you
became. There's an interesting pattern I
found across a bunch of recent guests,
which is many people were very good at
piano when they were younger and were
very serious piano players. For example,
head of ChachiPT, Nick Turley was like
almost going to become professional jazz
pianist. You were very serious in as a
piano player earlier in career. How did
you go from pist to one of the top
growth minds in the world? briefly.
>> Well, that's very flattering. Um, but I
appreciate it. Yeah, I I grew up playing
a lot of piano. Um, my parents were were
immigrants from Taiwan and I was the
oldest kid that they had. And so I
definitely felt that strong uh
encouragement, if you will, to learn a
bunch of things, take them seriously,
study hard, and so I did, right? And
like my parents, even though they
weren't musically proficient, they had a
like deep love for classical music. So,
I was the stereotypical like baby that
would listen to Mozart, I guess, when I
was sleeping type of thing. And I still
vividly remember like we had this
upright Yamaha piano and at the very top
of the piano we had this countdown clock
from 90 minutes literally every single
day of my childhood. Um, just practice
really really consistently. At first,
like I really was irritated by that
thing, but as I grew older, I started to
appreciate like music quite a bit more.
But anyway, like I think what really
accelerated my my interest and abilities
in uh piano was like I I feel like I hit
the lottery. I had perfect pitch and so
I was able to, you know, quickly
understand whether I was like playing
the right stuff or the wrong stuff and
just pick up music pretty pretty
rapidly.
>> What does perfect pitch even mean? That
does that mean you know which note is
playing? Okay.
>> Exactly.
>> Wow. So I can listen to a song and then
like just a very very clear
understanding of which note I'm supposed
to start with and if I'm playing
something wrong. So it's it's it's very
helpful. It's unfair. Definitely.
>> So anyway, yeah, I got I quite got quite
good like as a teenager in high school
and even considered like studying at a
music conservatory.
>> My intrinsic motivation for music wasn't
necessarily as strong at that point and
so I decided to go to engineering school
uh instead, but that would have been an
incredibly different career. And to your
original point around the relationship
between like music and growth, I didn't
really reflect on this until recently. I
have a four-year-old and I'm like
starting to teach him how to bang on the
keys a little bit. But a couple things
stand out. I mean, one is that I think
music and growth, they both rely on this
just consistent repetition. Like you're
constantly making mistakes. You have
this super tight feedback loop. You have
to get really resilient to just making
mistakes all the time. and you know that
the way of learning is through those
mistakes, right? So that's kind of a
thing that I learned very early. And the
second thing that uh occurred to me is
that they both have this like structural
underpinning to them. With growth, you
have a growth model. You have metrics,
you have experiments, you have channels,
things like that. But you also need on a
day-to-day basis to have creativity. You
got to come up with like interesting
solutions and hypotheses to test. And
the same is true on the music side,
right? of music theory of scales and
stuff, but to create beautiful music,
you need that passion, that emotion,
that flow. Um, so I think that's the
beautiful combination between the two.
Fun fact, my wife bought me piano/s
singing lessons for Father's Day
recently, and I've gotten really into
this stuff. So, I'm learning how to play
very basic piano now, and and learning
to uh identify notes and hit notes with
my voice.
>> Nice. What a weird.
>> Could be your next act. This could be I
could go the reverse. I could become a
professional piano player. Oh man. No.
It's so fun. So hard though. I'm just
like my fingers are like how do you how
do you do four freaking keys at once?
Yeah. Just like what is going on here?
Okay. So let's get let's get into the
meat of it. I want to talk about growth.
There's a very specific framework that
as we were chatting that I think would
be really helpful for people to hear and
learn from you. You called it explore
and exploit. I think there's a different
bunch of different ways to think about
this. Talk about this framework and how
that informs the way you think about
growth. Yeah, I initially came up or
heard with heard about explore and
exploit through uh my engineering
partner at Grammarly Nurmal and I think
he actually had taken some Reforge
classes. So maybe the original inventor
of it might be Brian Balffor who I know
has been on your pod. Um but anyway,
it's a great concept. The gist of it is
that when you're in exploratory mode,
think of it as like finding the right
mountain to climb. And then when you're
in exploitation mode, it's like focusing
your resources on climbing that mountain
effectively.
And certain companies, I think the the
warning is to basically spend too much
of your time on one end of the spectrum,
right? If you do too much exploration,
you can have your team feel a little bit
too scattershot, just trying a 100
different random ideas. What's the
through line? What's the strategy? How
do you pattern match, you know,
successes across them? And if you do too
much in exploitation, which is often the
MMO of growth teams, it can lead to this
like saturation and stagnation where
you're just locally maximizing a thing.
And even though this principle of
explore and exploit like it's typically
thought of as a as a macro thing, I like
to work with my teams more on the the
micro on the insight level. So I'll give
you a concrete example. So I work at
chess.com and um one of our priorities
is to encourage chess players to improve
to learn and improve. So one of the PMs
that we have Dylan he works on all the
learning features. The most used
learning feature in our product is
called game review. So you play a game
of chess after the game's over. We have
this virtual coach that teaches you
about your worst moves, best moves, etc.
And his job is to like improve user
engagement and retention. And so he's in
this exploratory phase trying to figure
out like how do I drive more of that
type of activity. And what he observes
is that 80% of people that review their
games actually do so after a win. And
that's really counterintuitive to when
we initially built the feature. We
thought that people would want to use it
after losses or to see their mistakes
such they could like work on their
mistakes. That turned out not to be the
truth when it came to the human
psychology and the actual data of it of
it. And so we made some changes in the
product experience. When you lose a game
now as opposed to surfacing your
blunders and your like horrible stuff
that you did, we flip it on its head.
And so we show you your brilliant moves,
your best moves. And we have coach say
something encouraging. You know, losing
just part of learning like keep it up,
that type of thing. That change alone
was pretty dramatic for us. It grew game
reviews by 25%, subscriptions by 20%,
user retention by a lot as well. Um, so
that was fantastic. But the point is
that it doesn't just stop there, right?
You have to take that insight, share it
broadly across the company, right? Now
adjacent product managers like the PM
working on puzzles can now think about,
okay, how do I audit these cold patterns
in my product and think about making
them more positive? Right? I can change
the success rating. I could tweak some
copy, change the color of some buttons.
And so you now can take this like
experiment win and expand it out 10x
across your organization. And that's the
kind of exploitation phase of it. So
when done right, right, you can
oscillate between the two until you
saturate out of exploitation mode. And
then you encourage the teams to to
brainstorm and get more creative again.
Amazing. Okay. So there's a lot here to
follow up on. One is is the core piece
of advice. When you find something that
works really well, find ways to build on
that learning. One is here's an insight
it can apply to other parts of the
product. Hey teams here's something we
learned unexpected maybe this can help
you also just keep find more like run
more experiments in the same zone I
imagine as a part of that.
>> Yeah exactly right I mean in my
experience the typical win rate and I
hate to use that term for experiments is
is often something like 30 to 50%. Like
usually you're not actually get like
you're trying a bunch of things a lot of
hypotheses turn out not to be true. you
know, consumer products are very
unpredictable like that. But when you do
find a thing that breaks through the
noise, and it could actually be a hugely
losing experiment, too. Those are also
super valuable, right? surfacing those
across the company like the original PM
running that experiment doesn't
necessarily need to be the person that
figures out what you should do for all
the other parts of your product
experience but the onus is on them to
clearly articulate what their hypothesis
is what they found such that then as
like a growth leader I can encourage
people to kind of swarm around that and
try a bunch of different ideas such that
the success rate is up and the impact is
up so it's just kind of oscillating back
and forth between the two that is the
magic bullet.
>> I think another takeaway here slash
something that I think about when I hear
what you're saying is there's often a
lot more wins in an area than people
expect that you can continue to find
wins and growth in something for a long
time.
>> Exactly right. Yes. Um, at the end of
the day, like users,
I think within a company sometimes you
can have this siloed approach where you
break apart the product experience in,
you know, 50 different ways and
distribute them across different teams
and you assume that users interact with
each of the different features with a
different mentality, but often times
that's actually not necessarily the
case. And so sometimes you can surface
an insight that's more, you know, human
psychology based that can resonate
across the entire product experience.
And so I think when you can find that um
you can double down.
>> People hearing this might feel like okay
yes uh find big wins and then find more.
Is there something you find that helps
you figure out when to explore versus
when to exploit when you've exploited
too far just like any heristics or I
don't know ways of helping people guide
them along this process of exploring and
exploiting. One one thing that I I try
to focus on at a company of our scale of
like a chess.com, right? We're running
roughly 250 experiments a year. So,
we're not like the highest in the
industry, but we run a we run a decent
volume, right? And so, when that
happens, I invest in these like
experiment explorer tools. And we could
talk about AI as well as another way to
kind of uncover and pick out these
nuggets of wisdom. But basically, these
explorer tools can allow me to look
across the spectrum of experiments that
are going on, try to figure out if there
are patterns between the the hypotheses
and the learnings that are happening.
And if I'm starting to see like more and
more experiments that are not
statistically significant, that may be a
signal to me to say, okay, we might have
kind of tried to exploit a little bit
too far. Like there might not be as much
juice to squeeze. Hey guys, let's like,
you know, get back to the table and
brainstorm and be a little bit more
divergent with our thinking.
>> Well, let me follow this thread on AI
and how you you're using AI to help you
figure this out. That is very cool. Talk
about that.
>> I think one of the the latest things
that we've been tinkering around with is
this text to uh SQL capability. It's
actually pretty powerful. Um, we have
this data request Slack channel where
for the longest time, and this is still
true today, like people will toss in all
sorts of just one-off questions, you
know, how many subscribers do we have in
South Africa or like, you know, how long
did somebody play puzzles like last last
month or something? And these ad hoc
questions, they often take a lot of like
human time to just go in and, you know,
a data analyst needs to prioritize it
and find time to go run the query. And
yes, you can invest in self-s served
tooling to improve at this, but also I
found that AI is quite good at doing
that first pass answer as well. Um, and
so we're working on like kind of
training some of these Slack bots to
essentially be the the first party uh
provider of a lot of these answers which
makes the company as a whole a lot more
data informed, I guess. And I think
what's also kind of interesting is that
just human nature is that if you have a
question that you feel like, you know,
you might be a bit embarrassed to ask or
you don't want to bother someone, you
just don't ask the question, right? And
so by the nature of having these tools,
you get actually a pretty large
explosion of questions being asked. And
I think you see this in chat GBT too,
right? It's like just having a thing,
right, that you can converse with that
you feel uh comfortable in makes a huge
difference.
>> Okay, this is extremely cool. So is this
something you build? Basically, it's a
Slack bot that gives you the SQL query
or does it actually do the analysis?
>> No, it does analysis. Yeah.
>> Whoa. So cool. Okay. Is this something
you guys are going to release or is this
just like somebody you guys should just
build this at every company?
>> We should. It's a good idea.
>> Okay. Okay. Well, there's an episode
where everyone in the comments is like
open source this. So, we'll see if that
happens again. Uh, that is very cool.
Are there other examples of that kind of
stuff that you've done or seen? I mean
an adjacent example is a lot of the
product managers like we're are
tinkering around with all sorts of
different prototyping tools right now
right it's just like go from an idea to
a representative solution today right
there's a lot of humans involved in
taking an idea writing up a spec doing a
review doing design etc u I'm sure
you've interviewed plenty of people that
have talked about this specific problem
right and so for us like we've invested
a bit in at least carving out the main
screens of our product experience things
like our onboarding flow our home
screen, our chessboard as an example,
and building like essentially AI
prototypes of those using tools like a
vzero or like a lovable, right? And when
you have those foundational pieces, you
can then share them with the rest of the
company and they can use that as a
starting point and then they can try to,
you know, put their ideas on top of that
and then they become a lot more
discussable and hopefully testable
relatively soon.
>> What's in your AI stack along those
lines?
>> The PMs are mostly using Vzero. The
designers love Figma, so they're using
Figma make. Uh the engineers are using a
a combination of tools right now. Um so
cursor, cloud code, GitHub, copilot.
>> Marketing teams use all sorts of tools
for translation, subtitles, you know,
content adaptations, etc. Customer
support uses intercom fin. So there's
quite a lot of tools that are kind of
used across the company. I would say
though that something that is kind of
annoying to me is that we haven't yet
figured out the bridging from the
tinkering to the workflow quite as
seamlessly as I would like. Right? And
so each subfunction even though the
common I guess wisdom now is that AI is
going to strip away this these like
functional titles. It is kind of true
that based on your experience like you
may gravitate to using a type of tool
more and if that tool isn't as
interoperable with some of the other
tools that you need to pass down the
chain to actually ship it into
production at least at our scale right I
think for smaller startups sure PM
should just go ship it but for us like
we are still doing some handoffs between
functions I expect that to change over
time and we are investing in some of
like you know design system components
and MCPS and stuff to make it a little
bit easier but yeah it's a it's It's an
investment and it takes time to to
smooth things out.
>> I want to come back to this topic of how
things have changed and how you work as
a product person, as a growth person
across the companies you've been at. But
first of all, I want to I want to talk
about another example of finding growth
wins and monetization wins. Uh Nome
Leavinski who is chief product officer
at Grammarly, you worked with him for a
while while you were at Grammarly. He
said that I need to ask you about the
biggest monetization win that you found
at Grammarly and how you discovered the
opportunity.
>> I had the pleasure of working with Gnome
and his product team at at Grammarly.
Um, some context first for those that
don't use Grammarly. So, Grammarly is an
AI powered writing assistant. And so,
typically people will use it as a Chrome
extension or a downloadable desktop
client. And basically what it does is it
overlays your writing with a bunch of
different
>> I use it. I'm a big fan. So, you're a
big fan and it saves my life. Fantastic.
Glad to hear that the Grammarly is a
premium business model which means that
over 90% of our users are on the free
service and the rest of it pay for
subscriptions essentially, right? And so
one of the teams they work on subscriber
conversion PM there is Kyla. Um that
team's great and their job is to figure
out the free to paid uh subscription
path, right? And so one of the
realizations one is that we weren't
actually tracking um the events that
well for the types of essentially
suggestions that people were getting and
how often were users seeing pay walls
and stuff like that. That's kind of step
number one. We had to put that
instrumentation in. Step number two is
that hey we noticed actually um first
let me explain some of the logic. So, as
a free user, you basically get these
underlines across your writing. And if
you accept all of them, um, then you see
the pay wall and that encourages you to
like subscribe for more nuanced
features. As a free user, the main
things you get are spelling, grammar,
they're basically correctness things.
And as a paid user, you get the like how
do you improve your tone to be more
empathetic? How do you improve your
writing to be more clear? How can you
rewrite entire sentences? That type of
thing. And so the observed behavior from
all that tracking and and data was that
actually a very small percentage of our
free users was deciding to accept all of
their suggestions. They were more kind
of picking and choosing as they go. And
I wonder if your um experience is kind
of similar too.
>> Definitely because yeah I'm always like
wait stop rewriting everything just like
this part is wrong. I will fix. Yeah I'm
very much a pick and choose direction
person. And then the second thing which
is I think equally if not more
interesting is that you know I was at
this company during this generative AI
transformation which is obviously still
going on right and quite frankly both
the company brand as well as the like
lived product experience for most of the
free users was that Grammarly was just a
product to fix your spelling and grammar
because those were the free suggestions
we were showing people right and so we
decided to flip that on its head
entirely and we said okay what if we
actually sampled a number of different
paid suggestions and interspersed them
to free users right across their writing
such that they were intermingled and we
would provide a limited taste of what
the paid offering had to provide. And on
the surface like even though it's
rational the the the concern is that if
we give too much of this away then will
people want to subscribe and we found
completely like that was not the case
right all of a sudden people were seeing
Gramly as a much more powerful tool than
they were before and our upgrade rates
like nearly doubled just through this
change and so I think this is
interesting just modernization learning
that especially if you work on a premium
product try to have your free product be
a reflection of like everything that
your product can offer you. Obviously,
to an extent, there's some costs
involved with some of the paid features
and things like that, but it generally
will pay it for itself if you're able to
put your best foot forward um and go do
that. So, that really worked well for us
there.
>> I think this is what converted me to
being a paid Grammarly subscriber. Wow,
what a what a a genius move. So
essentially it's here's uh here's a
bunch of improvements but you you get
like three I think max and then it's
like okay now you get to upgrade.
>> It's basically like a reverse free trial
but in real time like while you're
writing as opposed to a time based one.
So we kind of adopted some you know
patterns that are in the industry but
molded it to Gramly's specific use case.
>> Right. I was going to ask so it's not
like a full trial. like a capped trial
where you get a certain number of things
and then you run out and then you they
get refreshed I think once a day or
something like that is what I found.
>> Yeah, you got it.
>> Yeah, Grammarly is uh the best slashmost
devious at their upsells. I was I'm
always just like god damn it. You're
about you I'm so close to seeing an
improvement. I just could I just have to
upgrade and just like right there. It's
right there where my mouse is.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Well, I'm not proud of being
devious, but
>> devious in uh really getting me to buy
the thing.
>> Good job. What was it, Kyla? Okay, nice
job, Kyla. It's It's very effective. I
love that. And so, okay. So, in terms of
the free trial, I don't know. Is there
anything there of just there's always
this question of premium, give things
away, and then there's pro account. You
get it. There's like trial versus time.
Some features are limit. I don't know.
Do you have like a for consumer
subscription products like here's the
way to go? Yeah, I think first of all,
why do premium subscription in the first
place is a common question that you know
like I've joined all these companies
that are premium subscription like what
do I like about it? I guess um well one
I think it ties really nicely to like
mission orientation of a lot of these
companies. It's often like you want to
spread the product as wide as possible
because that's why the founders built
the thing, right? You're you're trying
to like improve education with like
Dualingo or you know Grammarly or
chess.com. These are meant to be
widespread products with a really wide
value proposition that fits globally,
right? And so obviously the lowest
friction to that is going to be a free
product. So that alone is part of it.
Another part of it is that a lot of
these products primarily grow through
word of mouth and especially if you can
build you know network effects in the
product like Dualingo has a bunch of
social features or with Grammarly like
they have a bit of a B to C to B play as
well. So you see Grammly being used by
teams and by companies and whatnot,
right? And even if users are on the free
plan, they still provide quite a lot of
value in making sure that Gramly can be
purchased by a co-orker or by a team
member or whatever, right? So, I think
these things are are usually why I lean
toward make sure that the core value
proposition that you're providing users
is free and is sort of permanently free
and then you layer on kind of a sampling
or a taste of some of the premium
features that are on top of it. That's
usually the sweet spot that I've seen.
As to the trials, reverse trials type of
thing, I think it largely depends. I
think if you have especially a B2B
feature where you may have some lock in
reverse trials can be super powerful.
You just want to get people in there.
You don't need to ask for their credit
card because they're using your CRM or
they're investing quite a lot of time in
like building out, you know, material
and content. And so by the time that
window drops, you actually like feel, oh
man, I probably should keep this and and
start paying. I think for a lot of
consumer products, it's a little bit
harder for that to work. And so I've
typically seen more just normal free
trials be be the norm.
>> Let me follow this thread of just
consumer subscription products. I feel
like this is the category that every
indie developer dreams of building a
product in because it's easy to build.
Cool. I'll build an app. I'll add a payw
wall. And then they realize this is a
lot harder than I thought from a
perspective of distribution and cs and
growth like that. Like is that the
biggest missing piece that people don't
get about building a successful consumer
subscription product? Yeah, I mean user
retention is gold for consumer
subscription companies. If you don't
retain your users, then a lot of the
onus is on getting them to pay on like
day one. That's super hard, right? Then
you're dealing with totally different
business models where you're paying for
users. You're trying to like
aggressively upsell them before they,
you know, hit any sort of habitual usage
patterns with your product. A lot of
apps naturally do that because that's
how they break the mold and get their
first, you know, users to to do it. But
I don't know, I've been fortunate to
join companies sort of after that
initial phase. But especially like take
dualingo and chess.com these are organic
word of mouth kind of driven businesses
and in in kind of both ways like they
grew the market right from a much
smaller market and as opposed to it
being a a very competitive space where
you're kind of competing and taking
market share from others and bidding for
higher terms and stuff like that. So I
don't know that there's something to
that. So what I'm hearing here is you
need to find a way to grow through word
of mouth for this to have any chance of
success and also retention needs to be
very high. Do you have a heristic of
what retention needs to be for you to
have a chance building a successful
consumer subscription business?
>> I think consumer companies tend to track
like essentially two main types of like
user retention. There's more of like the
new user one kind of D1, D7, etc. Um, I
think when you have your D1 retention
somewhere around like the 30 or 40%
mark, like that's quite solid, I think,
for for a consumer app. If it's much
lower than that, then sometimes I might
question like the intent of the user or
this the ability for that uh you to I
guess acquire just mathematically
acquire enough users such that you can
grow a a big enough daily active user
base.
>> That's surprisingly low.
>> Yeah.
>> So, it feels achievable.
>> It's achievable. It's achievable in
theory, but there are so many options
out there in the market and people are
feeling a lot of like app and product
bloat.
>> And so just to be clear, you're saying
20 to 30% of people come back the next
day. You're
>> 30 to 40 30 to 40 to 40% I think you're
in an okay place.
>> I think even more importantly, and you
know, you mentioned Jorge to kick this
off, but like
>> you know, he wrote that very very
popular article uh about the growth
model, right? And how like current user
retention rate was the biggest thing for
them. I think especially if you have a
product that has daily frequency like
that's actually the retention that
matters the most is that like of your
existing user base that has developed a
habitual pattern how sticky is your
product and it's that retention rate
that really compounds and build that
builds that daily habit. So over time
especially when companies mature a
little bit you actually focus most of
your energy on the existing user
retention mechanics um you find that
that's a much much bigger lever. One
exception is that Grammarly was a
different type of product in that you
install it and you don't proactively
open it every day. So that was kind of
interesting to me because I assume that
you should always just focus on existing
user retention. But for a product like
Grammarly, it's actually the activation,
installation, aha moment that's really
really critical and will carry the user
for a very very long time.
>> That makes sense. Like yeah, the stats
would show someone's a daily active user
because they're typing things and that's
not an accurate stat for Grammarly. The
other interesting trend I've noticed
across successful consumer subscription
products is they always start very
scrappy and very costefficient and spend
efficient because I think it's because
it takes them a long time to find
something that's working and they're
surviving on that margin of retention to
growth cost essentially.
>> Yeah, that's right.
>> Yeah, the and the retention piece that's
such a good point. It's like my
newsletter is very much along these
lines. It's just like how many people
are joining every day, how many people
are leaving and it's it's a difficult
treadmill to be on because people, you
know, they want to save money, they want
to spend on Netflix and things like
that. So, as amazing as you are, people
are always going to leave. So, the trick
is how do you find more people coming
than going? Yeah. And I think um just to
take chess.com an example, like I think
probably 80ish% of our daily or weekly
active users, I mean, I'll check the
numbers, but something like that would
be like a current a current user or an
existing user. and then a new and a like
reactivated or resurrected user. Those
are actually about similar size for a
company of our our scale. So even though
there's a lot of attention on that new
user experience, it's actually like
pretty interesting that the components
of your active user base are actually
not heavily weighed in the new user set
after you mature to a certain degree.
>> Can you explain that a little bit more?
>> Yes. So after some period of time, you
kind of stack up a lot of inactive users
in your product, right? And you also
stack up sporadic users, right? People
that may not have a daily habit, but
they will use it, you know, once or
twice a week or once or twice a month
type of thing. And so eventually that
math sort of adds up where you have,
let's say, hundreds of millions of kind
of dormant users that are coming back.
And it's actually worth spending some
time making sure that that kind of
resurrected, for lack of a better word,
experience inside the product is really
excellent and that you find novel ways
to try to bring them back. Dualingo as
an example, they did a good job of using
social notifications. And so if people
would use like contact sync or
something, you might get a push
notification that one of your like best
friends just started using Dualingo. And
that might encourage you to come back
and resurrect into the product. And when
you resurrected in the product, it might
be the case that your proficiency of the
language you were learning, like you
were learning French three years ago,
but now you like forgot most of it,
right? And so when you open the app
again, it encourages you to essentially
replace yourself, like do another
placement test and put you in the right
spot. And so some of these types of
mechanics for a more more mature company
can uh lead to pretty good ROI, I guess,
is what I'm trying to say.
>> Got it. Like essentially so many of your
so many people have already tried in the
past that to grow you need to resurrect
people that have been there and so
thinking through it's almost like a user
experience for resurrected users.
>> Exactly.
>> Okay. Let's zoom out a little bit.
You've worked at three of the most
successful consumer subscription
products in the world. What is what is
the difference between how these three
operate? I think there's many ways to be
successful. It feels like these
companies are very different. What's
kind of the gist of what each of these
how they operate?
>> Well, first of all, like there's
obviously a lot of similarities, but
I'll just focus my answer on the the
differences. So, I think Dualingo, what
struck me most working there is they're
very particular. They have a pro an
approach of product development that is
infused across like everyone in the
company. And they tend to they actually
wrote a playbook about this. It's called
the green machine. You look it up. That
was one of my most successful tweets
ever. I just tweeted something about
Dualingo just released their playbook
and I screenshotted like the the owl's
butt and screen like page and it was
like 5,000 likes.
>> That's hilarious.
>> Yeah. So yeah, keep going.
>> But yeah, I mean the ethos of the
company I mean they they hire a lot of
intelligent, energetic people out of
college basically and they give them a
lot of amazing experimentation tooling
and they care a lot about like the clock
speed of the company, right? So it's a
lot of creativity, a lot of ideiation.
The product experience of Dualingo
actually like changes multiple times per
day for each user which is pretty
shocking. And so I had never worked in a
place like that before. Um but it's
really struck me about how consistently
the company operated and they had specs
and processes for doing like each of
those steps in their product development
cycle and they were really really tight
about it.
>> Okay. So that's Dualingo.
>> Yeah, that's Duolingo. Grammarly, you
know, this is an interesting company
because they started as a paid product
oriented at students. Then they expanded
into more of a premium model tailored to
everyone gradually focusing more on the
professional base. And then as they
accumulate a lot more professionals,
they realize, hey, there's patterns,
right? We're seeing that a bunch of
marketing teams or a bunch of sales
teams or a bunch of customer support
teams or whatever, right? particular
functions within particular companies
were really adopting Grammarly at scale
and so they were able to then layer on
much more of a managed kind of
enterprisey motion and while I was there
I was focused on the consumer self-s
served motion but they weren't siloed
right they were they were intermixed
with each other and so a big part of my
job was not just to grow like the self-s
served revenue and self-s serve active
users but it was also how do you uncover
kind of the right
uh teams, the right functions, the right
companies for like demand genen and
sales to go reach out to. Um so that was
a very interesting it's kind of
productled sales work, right? And it's
really fascinating thing for me to
learn. And then on top of that with all
the transformation going on with
generative AI and even recently with
them acquiring uh KOD and superhuman and
becoming more of a productivity suite
like the company is just evolving pretty
rapidly. It's a really exciting uh thing
for me to be a part of and to see from
the sidelines, but that just made it at
its core kind of a different growth job
than um than Dualingo for sure.
>> Essentially a B2B business versus a very
consumer business.
>> Yeah. And a lot more meaningful
strategic decisions as well.
>> And then the core product team also, you
know, I'm used to in growth like laying
out the entire user journey that a user
go through, you know, acquisition,
activation, engagement, so on and so
forth, right? And typically
growth teams, if they're well resourced,
they can do enough to move each one of
these various levers, right? And it's
just a matter of like the sequencing of
them and what you want to prioritize
first. But Grammarly was kind of unique
in that the core product experience
itself was what drove repeated activity,
right? It's that I I previously
mentioned that current user retention
thing. What most drives that is the
frequency and the quality of the
suggestions that you get every day,
right? And so it was an interesting
learning in that I staffed up a growth
team, tried to work on this metric, and
then I realized actually like I'm kind
of just getting in the way. Like this is
really a thing that the core product
team um most influences. Let me have a
conversation with the core product
leader and then shift that over to them.
Um so yeah, just a super interesting
experience.
>> And then chess.com,
>> the thing that's most unique about
chess.com is that they are super
fanatical like about chess. Uh
>> makes sense.
>> Crazy. I mean, you shouldn't be
surprised. Obviously, the name of the
company is like this. Um, but they've
always hired people from around the
world. The company's always been
globally remote. They just hire people
that love chess. They play all day. They
watch the streams. Our Slack is always
blowing up of people's chess moves and
games and whatnot. You know, I think I
want to say this a little bit
delicately, but like Dual Lingo, even
though the product they're providing is
around language learning, I think the
original ethos of how to start the
company was really around motivation,
right? The hardest thing to it's habits,
right? It's how do you build that daily
habit? And I actually in many ways see
language learning as like their first
vehicle. And what they have a superpower
in is that again, the motivation, the
habits, etc. So that's kind of Dualingo
and Grammarly actually kind of
similarly, right? Like people know them
for the spelling and grammar
corrections, but what's really unique
about them is they they're integrated
across tons and tons and tons of
applications. There's not many many
products that work like that. That's
really unique. And so now if you hear
like Shashir, their new CEO talk about
like the AI superighway and all that
type of stuff, right? They can now use
that technology to provide a lot more
than just grammar writing. And so my
point is just that like chess is about
chess 100%. It's in the ethos. People
are crazy passionate. That just means
we're always dog fooding the product.
There's an just an amazing energy in the
company to just use the product all the
time, come up with ideas, and I love
that environment. I think that's fun for
me.
>> That is so cool. And what I love about
what you're saying is there's no right
or wrong answer. All of these companies
are killing it. I think Dualingo is
worth like 10 billion dollars, something
like that, and keeps growing. like I'll
look it up in a second. Uh, and
Grammarly is worth a ton and then
chess.com is doing super well. So, I
think that's a really interesting
takeaway here is is you can succeed in a
lot of different ways.
>> Yeah. What's really cool about Duelinga,
I was just thinking as you were talking
is yeah, it's just interesting that this
very structured, methodical way of
building is working so well because you
could listen to that and be like, that's
I don't want to work like this rigid
way. But the fact that it is killing it
tells us this actually works really
well. If you find something that works,
lead into it.
>> That's right. Yeah. The structure is
rigid, but the ideas are the farthest
away from rigid as possible, right? Like
you have seen their I don't know, Super
Bowl commercials, their memes, their
gamification tactics. Like it's a super
fun creative environment. So like Rigid
is the farthest possible word to use.
But what I just mean is they're they're
consistent. They have templates for
everything and like their product
reviews are like 10 or 15 minutes. It's
just people go in and out. So, it's just
it's kind of a surreal environment about
how rapidly and consistently they work.
>> Awesome. They're worth 12 billion and
they were much higher actually not too
long ago. They're coming down a little
bit. Uh so, speaking of Dolingo, when
people think Dolingo, they think of the
brand and the owl and the success they
had on TikTok and things like that. I'm
curious to get your take on as a very
growthoriented person watching that work
and your take on growth experimentation
data versus marketing viral Tik Tok
videos, mascots, things like that.
>> Yeah, I mean I used to think it was
versus, but now I realize that they
combine really well. It could be rocket
fuel for for your growth. Yeah, being a
product person, you know, I joined a lot
of these companies because they're
literally on the home screen on my phone
and I like I like using them and I
consider myself someone that's not
easily swayed by, you know, ads or TV
commercials telling me what to buy. So,
I always like had an element of
skepticism on the marketing side for
much of my career. But then yeah, you
you join a place like like Dolingo and
you see how do Duo the Owl has developed
a personality through the push
notifications and the product experience
and then seeing the marketing team
leverage that personality in their Tik
Tok and in their YouTube and all
throughout social media and just feed
into those like memes and then we would
track back in the product experience
like how did you hear about us and put
all those channels in there and some
days it would be like holy like
it's bringing in 20 30% % of like our
new users in any given day. Um, so those
two things really go hand in hand. And
that feeling has only been reinforced by
chess.com. You know, over the last 5
years, like the first 15-ish years of
this company was really under the radar.
Like 800 million people play chess
around the world, but most of that is
over the board. Until recently, there
wasn't actually that much online. But
five years ago, everything changed. You
had the pandemic, you had Queen's
Gambit, you had a lot of like YouTube
and Twitch streamers, you had a bunch of
kids playing it in school, etc. And so
it's really the combination of those two
things that that make it take off. And
it's like the growth experimentation is
more the the the slow and steady or fast
and steady, I should say, uh approach
where you're just continually iterating.
You're making the product experience
better, but then every so often, right,
there's a big wave that comes in. you
can quadruple your, you know,
registrations overnights and yeah, you'd
be a fool not to take advantage of that.
>> I was actually speaking at chess.com and
playing chess. I was at a coffee shop
this weekend. There's a like a family, a
dad and mom and a daughter ordering and
the dad's sitting at the table and he's
just like on his phone just like opened
up chess.com secretly and just playing
while he's waiting. Oh man.
>> Uh I will not uh admit or deny that I've
done that before. But it's, you know,
it's like that is if I could think of
anything uh more wholesome, I I can't
like that's an amazing thing to be doing
while you're just,
>> you know, my four-year-old can actually
set up the pieces, which is pretty
great. So, he he enjoys the game quite a
bit.
>> Oh, man. This four-year-old already a
pianist playing chess.
>> That's right.
>> What a stud.
>> This episode is brought to you by Miro.
Every day, new headlines are scaring us
about all the ways that AI is coming for
our jobs, creating a lot of anxiety and
fear. But a recent survey for Miro tells
a different story. 76% of people believe
that AI can benefit their role, but over
50% of people struggle to know when to
use it. Enter Miro's innovation
workspace, an intelligent platform that
brings people and AI together in a
shared space to get great work done.
Miro has been empowering teams to
transform bold ideas into the next big
thing for over a decade. Today, they're
at the forefront of bringing products to
market even faster by unleashing the
combined power of AI and human
potential. Guests of this podcast often
share Miro templates. I use it all the
time to brainstorm ideas with my team.
Teams especially can work with Miro AI
to turn unstructured data like sticky
notes or screenshots into usable
diagrams, product briefs, data tables,
and prototypes in minutes. You don't
have to be an AI master or to toggle yet
another tool. The work you're already
doing in Miro's Canvas is the prompt.
Help your teams get great work done with
Miro. Check it out at miro.com/lenny.
That's mirro.com/lenny.
Okay. You talked about AI a little bit
here and there. I want to follow that
thread. As a growth person, I imagine AI
informs chess.com in a lot of ways. So,
there's kind of like two buckets here.
>> How is AI changing the product, say
chess and other places you worked? And
then how's AI impacting your work as a
growth person? So pick one or both
buckets. And
>> yeah, I'll tackle them in sequence. I'll
start with the the chess one. Um just
because I have maybe a slightly unique
take on that one. So chess and AI,
they've been intertwined for almost a
century. Like some of the early
computing pioneers, like they just
figured, yeah, chess is an interesting
game. We can test machine intelligence
and write some algorithms. We're not.
And then fast forward to like 1997
and you had IBM, they had their deep
blue application who actually um beat
the the world champion back then which
was Gary Kasparov. That was like a huge
moment of like of shock and reckoning of
like, oh man, is AI going to take over
humans? Are we going to have jobs and
like all this stuff? And this is, you
know, 30 years ago. And thankfully,
we're all still here and more people are
playing chess than ever, right? And so
the game of chess and chess.com
specifically have learned how to augment
I guess the human playing experience
with the power of chess engines which
you know are definitely a powerful form
of AI. It's not LMS to be clear but
there's engines like Stockfish these
days that are just dramatically better
than the top grand masters in the world.
Like um
>> is that where we're at? Is just like I
remember when it beat humans and now
it's just dramatically better.
>> It's dramatically better. Wow. Yeah. I
think there's a rating system that
compares like relative skill level and
an average chess player somewhere like
a,000 maybe a 1500 on the high end. A
top grandmaster like Magnus Carlson is
like a 2,800 and then Stockfish and
similar engines are like 3600.
>> Wow.
>> And so to put that in comparison Yeah.
>> like at least it's not 10,000 or
million. I don't even know if that's
possible.
>> No, it's it's not 10,000 but it's
similar to like if the chess engine was
playing without a major piece like a
rook or something. they would still be
competitive against the best players.
So,
>> and this is the ELO score.
>> Yeah, the ELO score. Elo rating.
>> Magnus is is what you said about 2,800.
>> Yeah.
>> And then the stockfish is would you say
3600 38?
>> Yeah. And and really it's like it's
because computing power is so amazing
and there's so many techniques for how
to do like deep evaluation on specific
chess lines. They can calculate tens of
millions per second. So, it's not
realistic for for a human to compete
against that. But yet like watching some
of these chess engines played has opened
up a lot of creativity, new strategies,
new lines, new appreciation for the
game. And our chess.com approach is that
we can bring this technology for every
user, even people that have never moved
a piece before. I talked earlier about
that game review product. That's exactly
what this does. So behind the scenes,
we're running chess engines to to
basically spit out evaluations for every
move that you make. And then we
translate that and make that
approachable to the user using you know
their native language in plain
approachable uh style right and even
with audio and things like that as well
and that part of it like the personality
the speech back to the user that part is
LLM and so I guess my point is that
again chess and AI have been intertwined
forever but for us what's most important
is that we keep the customer at the
north star of it. We're not just
applying LLMs just because it's the new
hot thing. You've got to apply the right
technology for the right, you know,
feature to provide value to the user.
And so we never we try not to ever lose
sight of that and get let let hype get
us too carried away.
>> It's just really surprising. I think
people would not have expected. AI can
outbeat every human alive ever. And we
and chess is at an all-time high. People
want to keep playing and are playing
more and more than ever played.
>> Yeah.
>> Not unexpected. You know, interestingly,
LM themselves are quite bad at playing
chess. Like, they hallucinate moves.
They look at patterns, right? They're
they're very good at pattern
recognition, but not so good at going
super super super deep on a specific
chess thing. And if you've even tried to
like create or look at chessboard images
on chatbt, a lot of them have the wrong
number of squares. They're not set up
properly. And so, you know, I don't want
to be too dismissive. I'm sure it's
going to get much stronger at at
reasoning. And actually Google recently
sponsored a tournament where all the top
LLMs played a tournament against each
other. Um so that was pretty fun to
watch. They're improving but you know
this chess is specifically a game that
having a a trained you know deep deep
computing engine is just going to be
much much much more powerful than LLMs.
>> And not to go down this track too far
but uh Alpha Zero famous for beating the
top Go player. I imagine that all is
that was that trained specifically for
Go? Obviously not an MLM, but that was a
Go specific model.
>> Yeah. My understanding is that the one
that the documentary is incredible. By
the way, I don't know if you've watched
Alpha Go. It's it's it's uh it's amazing
how they took something so technically
deep and made it like,
>> you know, so so emotional and human. But
I think that's the that's the crux of
how we feel, I guess, about about AIS
and the products that we build actually.
Um but to your point, I my understanding
is that the way Alpha Zero is primarily
trained is that it just plays a bunch of
games against itself,
>> right? And so through the neural
network, it just gets smarter every
time. And because it can, you know, have
that repetition times, you know, a
billion or a trillion, I don't know
exactly what number, but it's going to
get pretty damn good.
>> Okay, let's go back back on track to
where we were going. So this was how AI
is impacting chess.com. How is AI
changing the just the work of a growth
person?
>> I like to describe growth as the the job
is to connect users to the value of your
product. And in order to do that, um,
what I like to do is think about that
user journey again and essentially staff
teams that are oriented around each
element of that user journey. And those
teams have specific metric goals, they
have road maps, etc., and then they go
run against them. So that's like how
it's structured. Um, AI, I think, can be
applied to speed up some elements of
that essentially experiment cycle that
you get through. So one example is in
product discovery as opposed to core
product which tends to have longer time
frames and you might do like you know
thorough user research or market
research you know it's more it's more
foundational more for first principles
etc. growth is a little bit less like
that. It's like you're running a lot of
experiments and you're the output of any
given experiment is the input like to
your next idea, right?
>> And so historically, I don't even I
don't mean historically, but just a few
months ago, right? Like we were
operating in a it's got kind of history
I I suppose.
>> Yeah.
>> Um but you know, there would be a lot of
manual writing of these like analyses
docs. You'd have to read them. you'd
have to understand what insight you want
to kind of grab from them and then write
another spec to to translate that idea.
That's still happening to some degree.
But I think that's a spot where even
tools like chatbt are super helpful,
right? You can just plug in like a an
analysis that another person wrote and
just have it summarized for you and give
you advice on, you know, ideas to go
try. And so that ideation, that research
cycle was much much faster. I talked a
little bit about prototyping also just
becoming much much faster than before.
We have not yet gotten to the point
where like product managers themselves
are actually shipping the code into
production, but it's dramatically
shortened the amount of time it takes to
conceive of especially like a bolder
idea that you might have. And so when I
talked earlier about explore and
exploit, right, a lot of the explore was
harder to do, but now it's a little bit
easier to do. you can take a a broader
concept and visualize it. And when you
can visualize it, center it around the
team, get people to click around it,
that makes a world of difference. Um, so
those are just a couple examples that
come to mind.
>> Awesome. I want to go back to this
phrase right at the beginning of this
answer that you shared that I think is
really helpful that you see growth as
simply your job is to connect users to
the value of your product.
>> Yeah. Can you speak more to that because
I think that's such a nice way of
clarifying what is growth's role. Yeah,
I it's resonates deeply with me because
I I feel like growth sometimes gets this
um reputation I guess that it's just
pure like metrics hacking like we're
cold cold people that just are trying to
move a particular metric up and we're
going to do whatever it can to like you
know throw walls and pay walls and add
friction in all all these spots. Um, and
even though that could theoretically
work in at like a micro level on a
specific feature or a specific metric, I
think what's most healthy for a company
and you know I want to work at durable
companies, right? Is to think about the
user holistically, right? And when you
take that framing of connecting um users
to the value of your product, that value
can change for a user over time. And
that also lines up really nicely to the
journey, right? like what a uh someone
that's not even a user yet needs to
understand about the value proposition
is super different than what a habitual
user of three plus years uh might need,
right? And so the teams working on them
should think from that perspective and
then from there right they ladder into
like specific problems to solve
hypotheses etc. Following the thread a
little bit more people listening to this
are imagining how do I get better at
experimentation? How do I run more
experiments? How do we do this better?
What are two or three tips and best
practices that you think people need to
hear or maybe are not totally aware of
when they think about getting better at
experimentation on their teams? I think
the first thing is just start somewhere.
You know, I I just read this Alassian uh
state of product report and it was like
40% of product teams like basically
don't run experimentation at all. And
there may be some good reasons for it. I
mean it could be philosophical or maybe
you're more you know B2B oriented or
whatever. So I I get it but I think for
a lot of especially if you work on a
consumer product that has some degree of
scale some degree of frequency with your
product you can collect enough data and
also I have found you know I can pattern
match all day long. I've worked a lot of
companies right but I'm wrong all the
time and I think consumer behavior can
be very fickle and especially when you
work at a company you become a power
user naturally. So sometimes you you may
forget like what the actual user
experience is for a brand new user. And
so you leave a lot of opportunities on
the table if you don't even try to
experiment. So I just encourage taking
that first step. Just run an AB test,
find a third party tool or something
that you can integrate quickly and or or
even just work with your engineers to
spin something up. Just get in the
practice of, you know, crawled and
walked and run type of thing.
>> Do you have a favorite tool by the way
just to throw out? Is there like a go-to
tool for you? We used uh Stat Sig at
Grammarly and I saw that they recently
got acquired. So that was exciting news.
Dualingo and chess.com both have an
in-house experimentation approach.
>> Um pros and cons to either obviously
Dualingo is an experimentation machine
and so it's been uh a huge accelerant to
have our own thing specifically tailored
to uh to be excellent at that. But uh no
I I typically don't encourage companies
to build experimentation in-house from
day one. You know at a certain scale it
can make sense and some of these
companies right they were started 15
years ago when these tools weren't out.
So it was just something they had to do.
>> Something that you mentioned to me uh at
chess.com your goal is to run a thousand
experiments a year. You said you were at
250. Talk about just that as a as a
north star.
>> Yeah. So part of having team members
that are fanatical about chess is that
the company can get pretty damn far just
like building for themselves, building
for the community and not actually being
very experimentation and data oriented.
The problem with that is that you can
have relatively lumpy growth, right? And
so part of the the kind of excitement of
me joining the company was to help
smooth that out and bring in that
experimentation mindset. So prior to
2023, the company practically didn't
experiment at all. Last year they did
about 50. This year they're on pace for
about 250. And then next year we have
that ambitious target of a thousand. Did
I make it up? Yes, absolutely. I made it
up. But but it's still a target and uh a
thing for the teams to to think about.
And a thousand experiments by itself,
like if you just did that, but you
didn't learn, you didn't make an impact,
and that's kind of a waste of time,
right? The whole point of setting a goal
is that you can have conversations about
what would need to be true to actually
hit that goal. And so that leads to um
insights like actually we need not just
product management or or engineering to
be running these experiments. Um we can
experiment with life cycle marketing
changing copy of push notifications and
emails. We can experiment with app store
screenshots and you know keywords and
stuff like that. There we have all sorts
of content marketing teams etc. Right?
We could have engineering enable no code
for specific screens. Think about our
home screen or our pricing screen where
we might want to do a lot of just tests
that are configurable without
engineering support. Um we might want to
just like track our progress and and
look at it from time to time and make
sure that we have the right, you know,
observability around this. So anyway,
that's the stuff that really matters as
opposed to the, you know, hitting that
goal um itself. So don't tell the team,
but I don't actually care that much if
we actually hit a thousand. But uh I
think if we get pretty close and we
accomplish some of these things, we'll
be in really good shape.
>> Okay, we'll make sure none of them watch
this. Um I think chess.com is in this
this is just a such a cool example of a
culture shifting dramatically from zero
experiments to sounds like two years
later a thousand which is like three a
day like you know that's you know it's
there's many teams running experiments
in parallel but that's a lot. What has
helped you most shift that culture? Is
it just the CEO being like, "This is the
way we're going to go." What What have
you learned about helping shift a
culture from no, we're not doing
experiments to a thousand experiments a
year?
>> Yeah, I mean, definitely a lot of credit
to the the CEO and co-founders like Eric
and Danny. They're amazing. It's not
their intuitive way of thinking about
growing companies, but their mental
flexibility and encouragement, right, to
to evolve and add this as a as a tool
for the company has been awesome. and
they've been on the front lines
preaching productled growth and
experimentation just as much as I have.
So, I'm glad that you brought that up
because I think that is critically
important for me joining a company to
not be at odds with, you know, the the
co-founders and the existing approach of
the company. I think that's absolutely
absolutely critical. I think the,
you know, I started this podcast with
the example of the game review and the
positivity and how that was shared. I
mean, I think those types of things are
really what motivate people, right? They
need to see this working in practice.
>> Wins
>> you can. Yeah, you need wins. You got to
celebrate them. People feel good about
the learning. It's applied across the
board. Like
>> who's not going to be energized by that,
I think. Right. So, um, you can't just
set goals in a vacuum and, you know,
create it from from top, right? People
have to see it working and and when it
works, like the metrics move and you
learn faster and you ship faster and
that that's a that's a great environment
to be part of.
>> What was the first experiment you guys
ran? Do you remember?
>> I don't know. Before my time, actually.
Okay. Okay. Got it. So they already
going down this track before they
brought you in.
>> They had run they had run it they had
run some.
>> Okay. Sweet. Are there any other key
lessons that you think people need to
know to be successful running
experiments at scale?
>> The system matters just as much as any
given experiment. Probably even more.
Right. I think starting with a growth
model so you have an understanding of
how your company grows in the first
place and which channels you're going to
leverage is critical. You need to make
sure that you are instrumenting your
product in and out otherwise you're
going to run experiments and have wonky
results. Um I won't name which company
but I I was I was part of a company that
had an in-house experimentation tool.
About three months into the company,
we're running like some experiments and
we realized that user retention was
actually configured backwards.
So all positive results were negative
results.
>> Oh jeez.
>> So that was kind of embarrassing
>> and uh that will never happen again.
>> Undo all those experiments and just
>> drive up retention.
>> It's kind of weird like we're seeing
people use the the features a lot more.
Why is user retention going
>> going going negative? Um so I have
plenty of horror stories around that
type of stuff but
>> Oh my god. On the flip side of horror
stories, you've shared a bunch of cool
examples of experiment wins. Is there
another that comes to mind? If one
you're really proud of or that was
really trajectory changing either at
Duolingo or Grammarly or or chess
>> the So I already shared one of chess.com
and one of Grammarly. I mean I could
talk a bit about about Dualingo as well.
>> Yeah.
>> Um
>> Dualingo uh and you had Jackson on the
podcast, right? Who you talking about
this streak?
>> Yes. I also don't want to steal his
thunder because I was going to think
about that. But the amount of learning
through um commitment and putting
streaks on a calendar and just getting
people started right as opposed to
achieving some large milestone. Um that
was huge. I I think we we did something
interesting. We spun up a verality team
and verality is this like really
amorphous thing to me. I think it's
really hard to generate verality in your
product. But Dualingo is a product that
is shared quite a bit. And so we
invested actually in some time to um
essentially add screenshot tracking for
like a brief period of time in the app
just so we could find out the hot spots
of where users were doing screenshots.
And you see this in other apps too. It's
not necessarily like you know some some
horrible thing. But we we did this for
some period of time and we're able to
basically articulate and say okay um you
know streak milestones was an obvious
one. Really funny challenges that you
get in the Dualingo experience is also
super highly shared. um advancing in the
top three of a leaderboard is not a
thing. Anyway, so you can find these
different moments where that's the case
and then we staffed those moments with
illustrators and animators and created
these really delightful experiences
around them. And I that worked amazingly
well. So as opposed to going against I
guess human intuition and trying to get
them to share stuff that they otherwise
wouldn't on the margins want to share
like lean into it more actually like
grab the moments where users are already
organically screenshotting and make
those much much much better and you can
kind of 5x or 10x and and drive a lot of
growth that way too. So that's not so
much an experiment that's more a core
product thing but you know it just
resonated with me that that was
interesting. Well, it connects to your
explore and exploit methodology. Just
find where explore where things are
happening and then try to exploit in a
nice positive way.
>> You got it.
>> Speaking of that, you mentioned this
with Duolingo is just very good at habit
formation and motivation behavior. Feels
like chess is good at this too.
>> You've worked at both these companies.
What have you learned about how to
motivate people, how to create habits?
again like Dualingo would not have
started without this uh insight from day
one, right? They they aim to to focus on
motivation and build a lot of these like
tactics. Um Jorge actually had this
model of like gamification uh patterns
having essentially three pillars to it.
You have the core loop, you have the uh
metagame, and then you have the profile.
And so we actually thought about it that
way too where you know your core loop is
is your lesson that you go through. You
do a lesson, you get some rewards, you
extend your streak, and then the next
day you get a push notification. It's
kind of the core loop of the product.
And making that really tight is is super
important because people need a habit to
stick to. Then you need a metag game,
which for Duolingo is kind of like the
path, but it's also the leaderboard,
achievements, kind of long-term things
that you're going to strive to such that
you have like long-term, I guess,
motivation uh to continue doing the
thing. And then the profile is also
critical because you build up a profile
over time. It's a reflection of your
investment inside the product
experience. And so when you nail those
three things, you can end up with a
long-term learning journey that can be
quite successful. And then to flip over
to the chess.com side, like what we see
is that over 75% of our new users, they
classify themselves as like, I'm
completely new to chess or I'm a
beginner. And unfortunately, if you're
new to chess and you're a beginner,
you're not going to have that fun of a
time playing live games. We see this in
the data. It's like less than a third of
those users actually win their first
game. And when you lose a game, user
retention is 10% worse than when you win
a game.
>> That's not so bad. But at scale, that's
bad.
>> Yeah. And and it could be worse. That's
true. But and so typically what like a
lot of mobile games will do is they'll
just create like a super simplified
version of the game. It's harder for us
to do at chess. And so without changing
the rules of that, right, I think that
that uh I don't know, it's just very eye
opening to me that when you're trying to
learn something, whether that be
language learning or or chess or
whatever, um usually those first steps
are fraught with, you know, a lot of
self-doubt and reinforcement that you're
not good at the thing. And so it's it
pays to be very intentional to craft
experiences that, you know, guide the
user around that. Well, I can't help but
ask, is there anything that helped that
along?
>> Yeah. So, like something we're
experimenting right now is just like
purely if you say that you're new to
chess, we're going to craft a more
delightful learn how to play experience
as opposed to dropping into a live game.
That's an example. Another is like
hiding your ratings for the first five
times such that you're not seeing your
rating kind of plummet. Um, there's a
lot of tips and tricks you can do.
>> I'm just imagining a little guide that's
like here's how you winch.
>> Yeah. Or play play against a coach, play
against a friend, play against a bot.
There's there's a bunch of different
avenues you can take. Yeah. What I'd
love is play against someone real and
then here's like tr here's where you
should move. Just like here here's we're
going to help you win
>> like a hint in real time.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
>> Well, I don't I don't want to be playing
you then.
>> Okay. Let me ask you a couple more
questions. One is just zooming out a
little bit. What's what's the most
counterintuitive lesson you've learned
about building products or building
teams across the many companies you've
worked at?
>> Yeah, I've talked a lot about products,
so maybe I'll flip to the team side for
a bit. Um, I think the standard way to
hire and build a team is, you know, you
fill out a JD, it's got a whole bunch of
different characteristics that you're
looking for. You typically will find,
you know, a short list of companies that
are kind of similar to yours and then
you try to hire for that, right? I think
that's kind of the the typical default
path that that a lot of companies take.
And I was really struck by, you know, my
experience working at, you know, some
smaller startups or, you know, take
Duelingo as an example where um over and
over and over like I saw some of the
highest performers just being people
that had very high agency, had that
clock speed, had that energy. Um, yes,
they they cared about the mission, but
they didn't necessarily need to have
deep experience on that matter. And in
fact, sometimes that experience could be
a crutch in certain ways. Especially in
this world where the grounds are
shifting so fast with AI, a lot of your
like learn habits actually need to be
intentionally discarded. You know, you
need to have a beginner's mind on this
type of stuff. So, I think this is more
true than ever. Um like looking for
people that respond and move quickly and
and think um
you know just just faster and move
faster, right? I think speed the fastest
speed of learning uh those types of
companies are the ones that I want to
bet on because I think those those will
end up uh surviving and thriving.
>> So just to double click on this this
idea of high agency is very uh trending
these days of just like hire high agency
people to unpack that a little bit you
mentioned a few of these traits. So
let's just help people see what you see.
So, one is clock speed. Just they think
fast, they move fast, uh they learn
fast. What else what else do you look
for that helps you see that they're high
agency people?
>> Yeah, I mean a lot of it actually
happens outside of the interview
process, interestingly. So, a lot of it
is uh you know, the types of questions
they asked. Have they actually tried
your product and gone deep into it? A
lot of it is the, you know, it's the
references. It's the like communication
that they have to even set up your
interview. like it's the energy they
bring into the conversation. You can
actually pick up a lot of soft signals
on some of these traits. Um yeah, over
time you kind of pick up on some of
these patterns. I don't know that I'm
perfect at it, but I've I've learned to
balance those things quite a bit more
than I did in the past when I would just
purely read from my questions in my
rubric and not care about anything else.
>> Yeah, there's like a vibes component to
it. This is also kind of support for the
work trial way of interviewing versus
just a talk interview where you have
them actually work with you for a week
or whatever.
>> It's a great point.
>> Okay. Uh, one other question I wanted to
ask you. You've worked at a bunch of
different sizes of companies from
startup to Grammarly. I don't know if
it's you call it a big company, bigger
company. Duolingo. Dualingo. I don't
know. How big is Duelingo? Like
>> they're about a thousand people. Okay,
cool.
>> Yeah. But I I worked at Google too to
start my career. So
>> Oh, right. Okay. What have you learned
about just the size of company that
makes you happy? What have you learned
about just helping other people that you
talk to decide what size of company is
good for them?
>> I I definitely believe that everyone has
a company stage that they shine best at.
I've personally gone through this
journey of big tech to like tiny tiny
tiny startup then landed in the middle
which I consider like my own gold lock
zone. I talked earlier about like what
actually gives me personally a lot of
energy is seeing across a company's
efforts but also the company being small
enough that I can get into the details I
can work with the specific teams I can
read experiment you know results I can
look at the pixels and so I find that
the balance of those two things tends to
fit best with medium-sized companies but
that's me right I think at big companies
uh like a Google you're dealing with
immense scale which which is interesting
by itself. You learn a lot of best
practices from your peers. They have all
the kind of tools and functions that you
would possibly want to go learn from,
but they can tend to move slower and
it's harder to kind of ship things and
get them out the door, which you know
eventually drove me nuts a little bit.
On the flip end of the spectrum, these
tiny startups, they move incredibly
fast, but I grew like all my gray hair
from those tiny startups because no one
knows about your company. And so you're
recruiting people one by one. you're,
you know, trying to get users one by
one. So, yeah, you can you can learn
fast and ship a lot of things, but if
you're trying to make a big impact on
the world, it can be be actually pretty
grueling to do so at at really really
really small startups. Now, some of them
do hypers scale and make it out. And um
obviously I I'm not one to to trash that
cuz that's the path that I tried for for
quite a while. But for me like I really
like the zone where I can contribute at
scale but also execute at a pace that's
more on like the daily and weekly scale,
right? As opposed to monthly and
quarterly.
>> And when you say medium, what size of
company is that roughly?
>> Yeah. So um these companies that we've
talked about in the podcast are about
500 to a,000 people. Typically these
companies will have been around let's
say 10 to 20 years. like they're
durable, ideally profitable. Um they
have a good leadership team, but there's
still a lot of dimensions to go figure
out. A lot of them are in in key
inflection points. Um so they're
certainly not stagnant, right? You need
to find a place that's dynamic, too.
>> Interesting. 10 to 20 years old. I don't
know. That's a that's a
>> not many people would feel like that's
where I want to be.
>> Uh I love that you found a number of
companies like that that you enjoyed
working at. Last question, and this is
going to be taking us to a recurring
segment on the podcast that I call
failed corner. People hear all these
stories of all these experiments on all
these companies you worked at. They're
all killing it up and to the right. Uh
in reality, you've touched on this, a
lot of things don't work out great. So,
can you share a story when something
went wrong when you failed and what that
taught you?
>> First of all, in the growth world,
you're failing all the time. So, I'm not
going to pick a specific growth story
because those don't actually eat at my
ego too much. But earlier in my career,
I did a lot of core product work. Um, I
worked for this startup called Chariot.
I don't know if you ever lived in San
Francisco, but
>> yes, it was like the bus superh
commuter shuttles, like 15 person
shuttles. Uh, they would essentially
drive from various neighborhoods into
downtown San Francisco. It's kind of a
commuting use case, a cross between
>> like the the public bus system and and
an Uber andyft. Um so I was there for
some time. I led product there and you
know the the core service was was really
loved by its users like it was you know
reliable and fast and you know
affordable enough. But we got pretty
interested in this idea that you know
maybe we can improve utilization. Uh
maybe we can make the service a little
bit more innovative if we offer dynamic
routes more similar to Uber andyft. like
how could we like the drivers are
driving these fixed routes but you know
if they have spare time they can go out
of their way go pick up somebody like at
their house or something and like keep
going. Um so we tried this we called the
chariot directly interesting attempt but
I learned a lot of lessons there because
ultimately it didn't work out. One
lesson is like this was kind of a
solution searching for a problem. Like
you never just purely want to chase a
like, you know, wouldn't it be nice if
we did this as opposed to you know this
is our our user and this is the problem
that we're solving. This is why it's
going to delight them etc. That's kind
of one. Second is um you got to consider
especially in these more like
marketplace type businesses there's more
than just one end user and we focus so
much of our attention on the writer app
without realizing oh yeah the drivers
are carrying a lot of the brunt of this
experience and our operations team is as
well right and so when the d the drivers
are confused or disgruntled that can
lead to a a challenging uh overall
experience for for the product right so
that's definitely another And the third
one is like we did a lot of actually PR
uh prior to the service going out just
to get the word out. Um and you know PR
has has its time and place. Uh but I
think doing it before you have
validation that customers definitely
want the thing is quite risky. It can
lead to a lot of sunk cost uh once you
get it out because you're you're just
you know you need to see it through. You
want to see it succeed. So yeah this is
a decade ago. Honestly, I had a great
time at that company, but I still
remember that vividly because it
contained, you know, three or more kind
of key lessons that carried forward as I
have built many products since then.
>> Yeah. Feels like you went to the
complete other end. Run experiments of
everything before you tell anyone about
it.
>> That's right.
>> Yeah. I remember the chariot bus showing
up at the Airbnb office and people
getting I'm like, "What the hell is what
the hell is this?"
>> That's right.
>> Very cool. I didn't know you worked
there. Uh Albert, we've covered so much
ground. Everything I was hoping we'd
cover. Is there anything else that you
wanted to cover? Anything else you want
to leave listeners with before we get to
your very exciting lightning round?
>> Um, no. This is great. Like, hope it was
useful for your listeners. I will say
like over the last few days as I was
prepping for this, like I I was honestly
a little bit anxious about like, you
know, do I have enough deep, you know,
independent frameworks that I need to
come up with? But just being authentic
to my actual experience at these
companies, you know, a lot of my lessons
learned have been off of the backs of
other people that have tried, you know,
similar things and have succeeded or
failed. And I think what's important is
that you you have that like your mental
sponge, right? You can try a bunch of
different things. You can absorb them
and then put them in practice right
away. Discard the things that don't
work, right? And evolve them for
yourself and for the company's needs.
Um, and so I I don't know. I think that
was just a realization that I had as I
was was thinking through this podcast.
And I think that's partly why I haven't
done too much public speaking.
>> I know exactly what you mean. When I
left Airbnb, I was just like and and
that was the first time I ever took a
break in my career of like like 30 years
of just working straight in school. I
was just like, what have I actually
learned? I've never just sat down and
thought about here's a thing I've
learned. And that led me to writing this
Medium post that did really well what I
learned at Airbnb. And then that
basically led to what I do now. So
there's a lot of power and like I love
that this is the excuse to make you
think through what have I learned
concretely that I can share.
>> That's right. Thank you for that.
>> Yeah. Yeah. And I actually so at the
beginning of this podcast before start
recording I always like to ask guests
what is your goal? What do you want to
get out of this conversation? And you
know usually it's like we're hiring. We
want to make sure people know about our
company or we want to get the users. Uh,
and your answer was just I just want to
give back things I've learned, which I
love.
>> That's it.
>> And you've done that. With that, we
reached our very exciting lightning
round. I've got five questions for you.
Are you ready?
>> I'm ready.
>> What are two or three books that you've
I yourself recommending most to other
people?
>> Yeah. The truth of it is like I have a
not just the four-year-old, but I also
have a one-year-old. So, most of the
books that I'm reading these days are
are kids books. Um, trying to make them
laugh and all that.
>> Wait, any favorite kids books? cuz I
three or two year olds. Sorry.
>> Well, you said that you started singing.
There's a book called Snuggle Puppy
>> that that has a song in it that just
makes my daughter crack up. So,
>> that is heartwarming for me. But um no,
like a book that I recommended recently
at work is uh Oulvie on advertising. Do
you know this book?
>> I don't know the book. I've seen like
tenants of marketing.
>> Yeah, it's interesting. So, it's 40
years old, but it's just packed with a
bunch of different practical examples
about copy and creative that that work
in, you know, these are old school ads,
right? But, you know, he took a very
experimentationoriented approach to just
try a lot of things. I think in the
book, it makes a good reminder that what
ultimately matters is to compel your
users to some action. You know, for him
is like buying a product, right? It's
not about just creating clever ads or
sexy, you know, creatives. It's to do
things that, you know, compel that
action. And I think that's very true for
many of our product and, you know, life
cycle teams. And so I shared that around
as a as an interesting recommendation.
>> Is there a movie or TV show? Sorry, were
you going to share another book?
>> Uh, yeah, actually. So,
>> oh, yes, please.
>> My our co-founder at chess.com, uh, his
name is Danny Wrench, and he is quite
well known in the the chess circles. um
he's releasing a memoir called Dark
Squares and it is super fascinating. Um
he grew up in an abusive cult and was a
chess prodigy and so it is just this
like
uh unbelievable story and I'm about
halfway through it. It's a reminder that
sometimes the people that you work with
you don't realize like how deep their
pasts go. Um but this is something else
and uh I think it should be out by the
time this this podcast uh releases
>> and it's called Dark Squares. Dark
Squares,
>> which is a reference to The Chessboard
and also Imagine the Difficult Past.
>> Exactly.
>> Wow. How cool. Okay. Is there uh are
there movie or TV shows you really
enjoyed that you uh you've recently
watched?
>> I mean, these days it's football season,
so I'm consumed by all the hot takes of
my favorite teams that I love and the
teams I love to hate as well. So, u
>> Who's your Who's your team?
>> Uh the 49ers. I have season tickets and
uh I go all the time. We had a rough
season last year so hope hoping to turn
around.
>> Okay, very cool. Okay. Uh Zerf product
you've recently discovered that you
really love.
>> Yeah, so last 20 years of my life
roughly. Uh I've moved around a lot, but
I've always been within walking distance
of a coffee shop. It's just like a
ritual that I go and get coffee and it
starts my day right. Two years ago, I
bought a house and for the first time
ever in my life, I'm like not by a
coffee shop and I was so depressed about
this for a little while. So, my favorite
product is uh is the Breville Bowl uh
barista and it just starts my day off
right. Um I like making horrible latte
art with it. And uh I think it's just a
reminder. I don't know like the products
that most
um impact me I guess are the ones that
uh I use all the time and it's a daily
habit like my and the most caffeine. You
got it.
>> Amazing. Do you have a favorite life
motto that you find yourself using uh in
work or in life?
>> As I was thinking about my piano
stories, I also remember that my mom uh
used to have a quote that's just she
just said like nothing is more important
than your reputation. And she used to
say this and I think the charitable
understanding of this is that a lot of
the small decisions that you make each
day, how do you treat people, how do you
show up, what's your character, etc.,
they can compound and they open doors
for you in many surprising and amazing
ways, right? Like a lot of these
companies that have actually joined have
come through relatively light
connections and even just being on this
podcast, right? I think I've I've seen a
number of folks that I've worked with
before uh be on this show and um so I
think you know doing the right thing
building a good reputation they can
carry you a long way and the flip side
of that is you know reputations are
fragile too right so if you do the wrong
thing take a long time to repair that um
so I don't know it just stuck with me my
entire life I thought that was a
>> interesting life motto
>> last question you work at chess.com
how's your chess
>> terrible compared to serious serious
players pairs, but but quite good
compared to the the casual ones. Yeah.
My my hero rating is about 1,800
>> for rapid games and about 1500 for
blitz. Yeah. But I play many times every
day.
>> Blitz is like fast chess.
>> Blitz is like faster chess kind of three
minute games. Rapid is more like a
10-minute game, which is still pretty
fast, but
>> And you say you play multiple times a
day. Is this Do they make time? Is this
like uh like I know
>> Okay. Like at Patagonia, uh there's a
famous book the founder wrote called Let
My People Go Surfing. And yeah, the rule
at Patagonia is you can go surfing if
the waves are great. Is that how it
works at chess.com?
>> Absolutely.
>> Okay.
>> This is always fun. So, we play all the
time. And they even have chess coaches
like on staff. So,
>> staff just like you can book, say,
>> you can book. So, I get bi-weekly
lessons and it's helping me improve.
>> Wow. Okay. This is going to drive a lot
of hiring for you guys. Uh saved it for
the end. Albert, this was awesome. Thank
you so much for doing this. Thanks so
much for giving back and sharing all
these stories. Two final questions.
Where can folks find you if they want to
follow up on some of this stuff? And how
can listeners be useful to you?
>> Yeah, thanks for having me. This was
great. Um, you can find me on LinkedIn
or Twitter. Not a super active poster,
but I read it all the time. Uh, if
there's something that I said today that
resonates with you and, you know, you
just want to get in touch, trade notes,
feel free to reach out.
>> And can they play with you on like can
they find you on chess.com to play?
>> They can.
>> Okay. Uh, do you want to share your
username or you don't want that?
>> Uh, I'm happy to. I just mentioned that
I'm a 49ers fan, so my username is go
niners. Uh, so wow.
>> I'm sure I'll get a lot of game
requests.
>> Here we go. Here I go. 1,800. Okay,
Albert, thank you so much for for being
here.
>> Yeah. Thank you so much.
>> Bye, everyone.
>> Thank you so much for listening. If you
found this valuable, you can subscribe
to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify,
or your favorite podcast app. Also,
please consider giving us a rating or
leaving a review as that really helps
other listeners find the podcast. You
can find all past episodes or learn more
about the show at lennispodcast.com.
See you in the next episode.